feat(post): tvjs accessibility (#459)
BedrockStreaming/tech.bedrockstreaming.com: _posts/2025-01-21-tvjs-accessibility.md

First of all, you need to know that I'm very passionate and engaged in accessibility. My main motivation is to make the streaming better for everyone, including people with disabilities 💪

## Background
### October 2022
During the R&D day at TVJS, with the previous TVJS POs we decided to investigate and see if it is possible to implement the audio guidance on our apps.
I decided to take the lead on this project and I started to implement it for the platform WebOS first (because it's the device I had at home).
At that time, the only documentation I found to implement the feature on WebOS is in using the [Luna Service API](https://webostv.developer.lge.com/develop/references/luna-service-introduction) to activate the audio guidance and call the method `voicereadout.readAlert()` in passing the text we want to read.
For the demonstration, I implement it in the pairing page. When we focus any button in this page, we can hear the text of the button.

Here is the result of this first POC (it's in French):
<div>
    <video width="320" height="240" controls>
        <source src="/images/posts/tvjs/tvjs_tts_webos.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video>

> </div>

Author: Yes sadly, it was at this time... If it causes any problem, I can remove it

In accessibility, often we can see some features for the blind or the deaf people, but it's rare to see something for the dyslexic ones and even less on streaming platforms.
So, I started with a benchmark to see what is already done in the industry and at this time none our competitors has implemented a feature for the dyslexic people, except Canal+ for the video subtitles only.
After that, I put myself in the shoes of a user and imagine what could be useful for me to enjoy my experience on our apps. The project "Dyslexic mode" on TVJS was born! 🎉

The idea is to have a new entry called "Accessibility" in the user settings, where the user can activate the "Dyslexic mode", personalize the font and the size of the text etc.

<div style="display: flex">
    <img src="/images/posts/tvjs/tvjs_dys_settings.png" alt="tvjs_dys_entry" width="50%" style="margin-right: 10px" />
    <img src="/images/posts/tvjs/tvjs_dys_entry.png" alt="tvjs_dys_entry" width="50%" />
</div>

And then, the personalisation is applied on the whole application.

> ![tvjs_dys_program.png](../images/posts/tvjs/tvjs_dys_program.png)

Reviewer: No `alt`? In an article about accessibility, that's not nice ;-)

Author: The `alt` in markdown is represented by the text inside the `[ ]` 🙂

As a user, this kind of feature is very important, especially on smartTV apps, because when we watch a movie or a series, we're on our sofa, which is often a long way from the TV, and we don't all have plasma screens. So, the text should be readable to keep the user on our platform.

I presented this project to the Product Manager, Mathieu Bouillot, an accessibility expert, and some of the designers, they were very enthusiastic about it. We worked together with Mathieu, and some months later the initiative "Style Switcher" is created 🥹.
The project deserves a dedicated article, so I will not go into details here. But the main idea of this project is to allow the user to personalize the font, the size, the spacing, the colors etc. of the text on the whole application.

## 2024 March: the first audit
In March 2024, we received the first audit of the TVJS apps from Mathieu. The score was 43% 😱 The score is not catastrophic, but it's not good either. We can do better, and we must do better!

![The score for TVJS with the first audit](/images/posts/tvjs/tvjs_accessibility_first_audit.png)

> Before to have the official US from the PM and PO, we decided to "preparing the ground" and fix some minor issues. And then, in order to have the same knowledge and the same understanding of the accessibility, with Mathieu we organized a workshop with the TVJS core developers to explain the basics of the accessibility, the WCAG, the ARIA, the tools etc. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe you can add a Resources section where you put all the tools, guidelines for WCAG

We can imagine the accessibility like an annoying constraint to do when we develop, because we need to follow some specific rules. But in fact, when we have the context and the importance of the accessibility for the users, the engagement is different. And it's what happened during this workshop. The developers were very interested and motivated to improve the accessibility of our apps.

> During this workshop, we also took the time to explain to Mathieu the constraints and the specificities of the smartTV apps, because it's not the same as the web apps. For example, the focus management is different, the navigation is different, the screen reader is different etc. So, with his help, we did a mob programming to find some solutions to implement the screen reader on our apps.

Reviewer 2: Maybe you can be even more exhaustive and explicit about the number of platforms  we have to handle and how challenging it is, as following a11y html semantics guidelines didn't result at all at getting accessible devices as we could have expected :(

Some months later, we received the second audit of the TVJS apps from Mathieu and the score has increased to 61% 🚀 I am very proud of my team and myself, because we did a great job! We improved the accessibility of our apps by 18% in just a few months. It's a great achievement, and it's just the beginning. We are motivated to reach the 100% of the accessibility score 💪
Of course, this performance is also due to the work of Mathieu (PM) and Shaïnez (PO) which have been very helpful and supportive during this refactoring.
I think the communication between the product line and the technical line is primordial to be sure to go in the right direction. And obviously, the communication between the developers is also important, it's thanks to our many brainstorming sessions that we found the best solutions.

If I have some advice to give to the developers who want to improve the accessibility of their apps, it would be:
- Take the time to understand the accessibility, the constraints and the specificities of the platform (in attending a workshop for example)
- If possible, to have a referent in the team to keep the focus and the communication with the product line and the designers

> - Before developing, to think about the accessibility and use the good practices (like the semantic HTML, the ARIA, the focus management etc.)

Reviewer 2: This could be the first point ?

> - To test with the tools (like the axe, the WAVE, the screen reader and the browser accessibility panel)

Reviewer 2: And to test ASAP too :D
Also : Possibly last point : feedbacks from actual users ? I think it is in the pipe with Mathieu ?

> To conclude this article, I would like to say that the accessibility is not a constraint, it's a strength, and it could be a competitive advantage for our apps. If our platform is accessible, the users will be happy and will prefer to use our apps rather than the others one. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To conclude this article, I would like to note accessibility is not a constraint, it's a strength, and it could be a competitive advantage for our apps. If our platform is accessible, users will be happy and will prefer to use our apps rather than the other ones. 
```

I'm a bit sad reading accessibility "could" be a competitive advantage and not "is" 😨

> The accessibility is not only for the people with disabilities, it's for everyone. And at TVJS, we understand that well! 📺

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessibility is not only for people with disabilities, it's for everyone. And at TVJS, we understand that well! 📺
```
